
This boy of whom we write found himself in diapers in the midst of Suburbia, a strange mix of conformity and difference, a connection of cookie cutter houses and slightly customized places with ample trees and passageways connected by the ubiquitious presence of the automobile. His father was fond of trees and, as a hard worker and wise steward of possessions, had acquired a larger plot of land and curious old farmhouse upon a hill that towered over what otherwise was an expanse of similarity. Though the father was by turns, captured by fictional fantasy and pragmatic, the son was ignorant of all but fantasy and from a young age turned simply turned his eyes to the stars and spent his evenings imagining their celestial conversations. 

Although the father was not of any great pedigree, or even intelligence, his wise stewardship allowed the child to stay at home for many years with his mother and engage in a private course of study that included computer science at an age when other children were preoccupied with sports and console games. His habits, which might have seemed peculiar to any outsider, involved exploring everying angle and possiblity included with the strange computational machines brought into the house by his father and creating fantasy worlds  
and an equally fantastical bunch of people to populate them. 

However, soon the father was beset upon by a mysterious disease and the craft of the young man was not yet such that he could seek to turn back the impulse and remove the evil seed from which it sprung. He his forceful orations gave way to what, in many ways, was a strategy of perpetual retreat, a technique that took him to many houses of learning in many lands, combing forgotten tomes for their secrets, the way to rebuild the burning sword that had once guarenteed the safety of occidental lands.

The milling crowds paid him little heed as he passed through them, except when stirred by an evil impulse, and, knowing that his quest was other, he ignored most of their festivities except when attempting to provide cheer to those whom he passed by along the way. 

This is not to say that we can salute all of his actions. Although he loved the prayers of the pious, he was only truely his own when in the midst of a great hunt and many a time in his zeal he exceeded the proper boundaries, even slaughtering the sacred animal while passing through the sacred grove and angering for a time the tender guardians.
 
If his proprensity to be alone was at times a great benefit, it was equally a great danger, for the things that beset upon him in his dreams were at times more powerful than the man himself and, early in his training, he was given a near fatal wound that would not heal for many a year.

This is where our story begins, in the hut of a fisherwoman not far from the whitewashed castle walls. The wound in the thigh still burns and the knave, despite his journeys, has never been officially been given his heaven appointed task. Indeed, up until this time we can only say he has only been dimly aware of this task and, hearing the voices of the birds, has followed them wherever they lead without true knowledge of his own name or destiny.

He is, at this moment, almost without memory. His journey has been years long, yet without destination. He does not even know who gave him the wound, only that that once he had a purpose and that this purpose has not yet been fulfilled. 

 




