
In the bower before the garden lay a recently slain knight, his wounds still wet and his body not yet subject to decay. The wind blew over him softly, tickling his girdle and giving the image, were it not for the pool of blood which stained the ground around him, that he was simply sleeping.  

His foe, the red knight, stood looming in the near distance, a broken lance on the ground beside his stead, and his own scepter-like lance towering in the air, red upon red. 

Behind the man was an magnificent oak hung with the shields of slain knights, its leaves also each with a reddened hue, as though it's magnificance was a result of of a continual diet of human blood. 

There were too the evidences of some shrine in the shadow of this tree, tended and maintained by some hermit. 

Indeed, if it were not for the feeling that one could hear the last gasps of the recently slain knight, there seemed a picturesque and serene feeling about the scene spread out. The knight in burnished red, the shining chivalric emblems, the tended shrine, and, above them all, the towering oak which appeared to be forever burning in the sun. 

If the scene appeared untouched by time, we might note also the presence nearby of a equally carefully tended graveyard with space for each Christian body and always a gravestone carved with cross prepared in advance for the next arrival. Surely the red knight was formidible and, because blessed by God, could not fail to present the passage of the next knight confident in his own prowess.

Indeed, there was no need to fear. No knight had come near to besting him, and even the red knight grew weary of his self-appointed role as gate keeper and slayer of the weak. Where was the one who would arise and provide a stoney gaze and blade of tempered steel to match his own? 

