Enlightenment, by my definition, is the ability of the human to actualize divine light. Typically, the human system as emerges from the womb is unable to hold this fire, although it may be able to perceive it. It may also be able to, by use of this higher faculty, which we term intuition, act in accordance with this light. This takes the form of ethical behavior (acting according with a perceived ethical norm) or artistic endeavors (which I use in the inclusive sense of referring to all injection of style into any action, inclusive of both words and dress). 

However, the energetic system of the human can be opened, old energies cleansed, and improved to be able to circulate this fire. However, this energy comes in different types. There is energy closer to the original divine fire and energy closer to matter as usually perceived. This is why every spiritual tradition has referred to this as an ascent, or even to a ladder.

After the system is cleansed, there is a fairly linear progression. The "heat" of the human system can be raised. However, this may be dangerous insofar as the increased heat of the human system may expose it to certain types of new experiences and dangers associated with them. In a certain sense, the trips experienced by drug users are a way of forcing the opening of some of these faculties, and, although the use of external substances is certainly more likely possible to produce a harmful experience, this danger is not removed by the usage which we might term more "natural."

However, because of the problems with matter, this process is painful and, after a certain point, the human body itself seems an unnecessary impediment. Also, because of the dangers involved, certain problems appear later on that are unique to people who have taken on this path, and their problems can only be fixed by people farther along the same path.

As this energy is gathered, it can also be perceived by other people. Because this is usually a pleasant feeling, these people are usually gathered around and considered saints or gurus. However, this process typically takes away from the person

Meditation is a tool to increase the heat of the energetic system. The most important introductory point is that one reaches stillness. The absence of activity in the nervous system allows other processes to take place which energize the circuitry. 

Various supplementary practices usually fall into the group of either physical exercises (since the physical and energetic bodies are inexoribly linked) and "pranayama" exercises, which through various means cleans and energize the energy body. The most simple and yet powerful of these is breath retention. 


Intuition develops along the same axis.