There are four main philosophies of life, each of which demands total devotion, although the reality of present arrangements is that we freq. exist in a conflusion. 

The first is the materialistic. This denies any other spiritual reality and demands satisfaction within the limited realm of the senses.

The second is the Stoic. The Stoic denies the desires of the world yet is bound by duty to it. He is defined by action according to this perceived duty and not by speculation about it. He is first pious then pragmatic. He is neither indulgent nor abstemious. He adheres to a golden mean and fulfills his proscribed role.

The third is the Semitic. The semitic is bound by a great passion which requires absolute devotion by means of various acts, originally participation in a religious cultus but gradually transmuted into inner psychological assent. This passion leads him to dream of a transcendental kingdom, but frequently involves himself in unsuccessful (and violent) political engagements to bring this about. 

The fourth is the Brahmanic. The Brahmanic is defined by the negation of the material world and the necessity of total self abnegation in order to live in a transcendent one. It denies political realities. The one who would pursue this path must remove himself from society and pursue a life of extreme asceticism. This will lead to the acquisition of paranormal powers and, ultimately, the reabsorption into Brahman.

---

Evaluation with respect to history and politics:

The materialistic is limited in scope and has no psychological depth. It views history as a single linear progression. There is no myth. Men view themselves and others as self-seeking autonomons.

The Stoic is deliberately limited in scope in its speculation but rigorous in action. He has cultivated history as an  art since the expression of truth about historical events is necessary for his pragmatic vision. Myth and history are two distinct forms for expressing different expressions and are to be cultivated separately.

The Semite claims both the spiritual and material worlds, yet seems to find neither in its fullest expression. He has cultivated history, but only piecemeal as statements of literal truth are frequently made subject to figurative expressions. Myth and history are frequently conflated.

The Brahmanic, if descended from another civilization (e.g. the Atlantean), with some greater spiritual understanding, has by and large failed to establish itself in any meaningful way anywhere on this planet at this stage in history. Assuming that some degree of the paranormal powers are correct, they also are not significant enough in their impact to effect any major change on societal well-being.

 
Evolution with respect to health:

(1) Cannot deal with aspects of health which do not fall into a formal evaluative rubric subject to scientific analysis, meaning that all psychological aspects are treated as mere outworking of chemical reactions and treated with drugs. Strives for medical discoveries on the basis of fame to be accrued or the thrill of the competition.

(2) Cultivates all manner of science with the intention of curing diseases and improving the physical well-being of individuals, without any concern for propriety (e.g. cadavers are dissected, experiments are conducted on animals) so long as the end result is a greater benefit.

(3) Looks to metaphysical realm for future release from world controlled by the devil, focuses on prayer and claims that supernatural intervention will heal physical bodies.

(4) Does nothing except for cultivate health necessary for proscribed abnegation. Has no need for "materialistic" science. Claims that yogis with paranormal powers can heal people.

What's the point?

The existential question dominates human existence: why am I here? what am I to do? Each major tradition answers this somewhat differently.

(1) Maximize personal status and/or that of your posterity. Be happy.

(2) Do your duty in this life. Let others worry about the rest.

(3) This life doesn't matter much, but do the "right" thing. Heaven awaits. 

(4) Physical existence sucks. Evolve into an purely spiritual being that is not dependent on physical existence. 








