One possible resolution for the problems outlined in my "four philosphies" essay, which outlines the conflict between a practical/pragmatic order which emphasizes existing in reality, including political involvement and a "Brahamanic" statement of the ultimate irreality of the visible universe can be found in the romantic insistance regarding the essential dream-liken nature of reality and in the polarity found between the sexes, which exists on both a metaphysical and physical level.

We find in many situations a desire to avoid pain, which is essentially the desire to live at one end of the polarity without admitting the necessary existence of the other, or, potentially, to deny that the polarity exists at all. Monastic orders naturally evolve and exist because of the extraordinary pain of human communion between the sexes and the incredible pleasantness of removing oneself from the cycles of birth and death and associated pain. 

Although one might cry that it is pointless, the removal of associated pain does not necessarily amount to any sort of liberation. One might say the same about the Brahamanic state. The greatest yogi possesses still a human body, and if he does not, we cannot call him a yogi. This act of physical existence, which he may try to deny or remove from the equation, cannot entirely be removed from the equation. This is reminded to us by the overwhelming injunction to stay away from habitable places and especially the presence of woman.

The yogic task is ruined, irrevocably, by the presence of the woman. This is to say, "lust" reigns whenever man and woman are present together. However, as mentioned, this desire is not merely the pull of the loins, it is a metaphysical polarity that is found in all cases and present everywhere in nature beyond the human's felt need. One can even have a energetic sexual exchange with a willing flower. 

Indeed, all of beauty as commonly conceived and perceived is nothing but a thrilling expression of this simple truth. We enjoy and perceive it. We even dignify it at certain times with the appelation "love." Certainly there is something more to love than this, it is when the "love" that we know about and sometimes perceive is all that there is, when the notion of self-consciousness fades and there is nothing else.

If we have the saint, who directs all her love at a single abstract impulse, we must also speak of the prostitute, who exists more or less in the same way in the earthly sphere. This is not to say that we speak of all prostitutes, but the one who gives herself entirely to her work, who loves it. She is the great medium of the exchange -- the exchange happens with, in, and because of her efforts.

In other words, if we have a disembodied saint, we have a fully embodied prostitute. If we have a disembodied sage, we find also a fully embodied warrior. We can only admit that both of these polarities exist in both levels. The fully "man" has to embrace both axes. He is a warrior in the spirit and a victor also in the flesh.

However, rather than conquering the woman, he becomes one with her. He is giving, even as she is giving. There is nothing else besides the two of them, and the two of them are not longer separate. If they are giving in the flesh, there is also a giving that is out of the flesh. If there is a giving that is removed from earthly consciousness, there is a giving that is entirely invested in the earthly consciousness.

We do not find an end to the pain here. In fact, it is intensified. The one who exists soley in the realm of distance and separation may find peace. The one who exists only in the realm of orders may find pain. The one who is invested first and foremost in heavenly and earthly love finds himself continually in passion and continually in pain.

There is a sweetness in the union, but this union is always followed by the increased awareness of the gap. What more is there that can be found.

We have spoken of the culminatino, which is unmistakably the sexual act -- we must speak also of the middle, the gap between the word and the action spoken of by T.S. Eliot, the unmistakable, eternal gap, by which there is no water on the rocks and only the distant cry of thunder. We have heard of seas of fertility but discovered only a wasteland and the cries of a tortured Francesca.

Perhaps an idiot has passed across our way, but we have not heeded him, and if, if he seemed ignorant of the world we live in, this blissful fruitful seed may have passed above into the air without a thought of having fruit.

What a strange concept -- is the human tree such that can grow to the clouds without leaving fruit? Is there a meaning to the curse of the fig tree or the buried talents? And, if so, what is our fruit? Why indeed did the Christ consort with the prostitute?

There is more there than we wish to see, for it is neither license nor rejection, it is neither approach nor retreat, it is the eternal presence of the conflict.

We have seen this in the art of ancient antiquity. Our desire was made always present. Our bodies, including that which we seek to hide from others, was brought into the ever constant gaze. We were ennobled simply because we were forced to acknowledge always that part of ourselves that moves towards the other without that movement, and this is, in fact, empowered movement of a greater sense.

To exist in the desire is to live. It is the ultimate abnegation, in the sense that the desire is knowingly forever unfulfilled. It is the tragic condition, insofar as it leads each man (or woman) to an unwilling and terrible fate if unchecked. It is, at the same time, the stuff of great comedy and love, as it fills the universe with a terrible force. 

It is the thread that passes between East and West, that cuts the Gordian knot, which renders the unknowable knowable and the knowable forgotten in the sands of time. We have seen the woman triumphant and also the man triumphant. We have seen the goddess of the springs and sacred groves. We have seen the man upon the mountain peak. 

He has spurned her, and she has spurned him. He has embraced her, and she has embraced him. There is violence in this romance; there is continual and terrible violence.

However, our desperate attempts to end the violence have created relgions that are nothing but chains. We have our monastic retreats, our calm mountain sanctuaries from the tulmult, and our milling streets full of the dirty, unclothed, and poor. For who is there to cloth them except he who is willing to ride into the tumult with a body full of rage at this tragedy, and who is there to make formidable love except he who has known this human condition for what it is? 

This is why the great monument of the West is in its artistic tradition, which towers so far above its other accomplishments. Wherever we see the light most clearly is where we see woman. Wherever exists polyphony is this very same divine tension. 

We can respond with hatred, we can respond by running away, or we can respond with love. 

We are not talking about the specific forms that this action can speak, for there are many. We are not even of speaking of motive, for the action of the heart -- when indeed the heart is truly engaged -- rarely requires the mind's input. We are speaking of being led into the tumult and fires of love, the fires that are known by the saints and sages, but most of all those who have seen and attempted to love another in the flesh.  

However, we cannot love each other without loving God first. We cannot know what love is without knowing God. However, our love is not the love of a great commitment, of a forced bond, of a chain that we force the other to wear upon their breast or wrapped around their loins like a great locket pulling them to the grave. Our demand is simply love.

And we know from the very moment that we open our heart that it will be rejected. Live!  Yes, "live!" was the great and passionate voice of the one beyond to his chosen daughter and, though he bound her to himself, though he offered her his all, she spurned him for all manner of nearer and crueler things -- the infinite fashion of the moment which appears like patterns to the eyes. 

And yet the drama always continues, for in those perfumed lockets we know is nothing, and it is only when one is crying and looking up and beyond that one finds something worth looking for. If we say that we find it in the stars, we are not lying, although we find it only when we are moved by the stars themselves, not simply as observers but as planets swinging in passionate orbit moved and burning by the light of that same ancient fire.

We may burn out if our fires are violent, and this explosion may be beautiful and bright, but we also have fires that are not born in the passion of a moment, and these fires burn long and brighter yet, even if they be distant. 

Our greatest fire is always sexual and it is something that we must recognized. Although, as soon as we catch ourselves consciously attempting to fulfill or redirect it we have already lost. We are not following a celestial orbit, we are not fulfulling our generative duty, and we are far, far away from love and closer forever to the passive, turgid world where rigor mortis greets matter by simple lack of imagination. 

Here myths are our greatest friends, for myths enliven, capture, and show us another way beyond which we think we know and a dance that has light up the sky for thousands of years. If we are moving at all today, we are also dancing, and we cannot stop dancing. 

Where is theology here? It is on the head of a pin, and we must embrace the angelic doctor and shower him with kisses for his own attempt to dance in the world of intellect, even if we can admit, like him, that all of these words are nothing but straw when the great celestial romance is finally revealed. 

Oh, there is endless pain in these words, there is the man who walked among man and who tore open his heart for the great nations and yet who was ignored and forgotten and caste aside. The light is always among us, and yet, we have so many other things on our minds.

We can only find who we are by finding out what we must do, and there is an infinite series of things that await our efforts once we begin to move and as we begin to accomplish them we begin to approach infinity ourselves. A staccato march of steps approaching a line approaching a stream approaching the ocean itself. There is a magnetism here, a word that unites all the other words, and a great dream that one can find little reflections of in each little dream.

And so dream! The more you dream the close you become to the great dream, the more you dream the more you truly act, and the more you share your dreams with others the greater that dream becomes. Pay no heed to the warring nations and little peoples that populate them, dream of something greater, dream of something which unites them, dream of the little becoming the large, of each droplet being united into a greater whole. 

Find the dreams of your family, of your people, of your tribe, of your nation, of your race, of your tongue and live them and unite them with the great dreams of others. The more you dream the greater you become and the more you realize that to live is to dream, that to be a dream is to be alive, that to dream like a butterfly is to be that butterfly and by turn to be yourself. 

Stand on the bride and know the joy of the fishes, stand by the shore and feel the great motions of the waves. Soar through distant galaxies at night and know what it is to have the desire to phone home. Stand before a mighty army and know the desire to smoke pipeweed in your distant hobbit hole.

Each desire is part of a dream. Each dream is part of a whole. Each little whole is part of a greater whole and at some point all of the dreams unite into the great dream of the great other, and the closer you come to it, the less other it is.  You are that. 

We have every effort to destroy duality by avoiding it. We have every effort to destroy duality by seeking something near that. But our humanity is defined by this very fact of this great memory and tear in our heart that makes our proper fate a tragic one, should we take the time to remember it.

But if this is a fall, it is first a separation, and if there is a new found distance, we can only remember the quest of those who have fallen before us on the way from Troy. Have we found our way back home? Have we created a new sacred circle? Have we dreamed a new dream? 

The zealous wish to keep our dreams for themselves, to occupy our citadels, to claim our fame, our country, our citizens, our wives, and our lives. We have nothing to say to them, except "come." We are invincible because we cannot be beaten. We are mighty because we know that there is nothing that can stop us. We are a new race of conquerers because we are stronger even than death.

No death can stop or hinder us. We are newly alive and burnished with weapons from above. There is an emblazoned seal upon our foreheads that marks us as conquerers, and we shout already with the great choruses of past ages that we shall again mark the walls of a new Byzantium.

We are all of the dreams of all past ages united in one. We shall ride by the thousands into the flame,  emerging as millions bound to each other by newly ignited blood.











 








 














