
The following essays explores the idea of property from the idea of theft with the assumption (as with "orthodoxy") that the positive and definition of "property" was derived primarily after a need was perceived to present an unwelcome diversion from expected behavior (as with "heresy").

Generally, all people with even the smallest moral sense claim that stealing is wrong, although what they mean by theft varies rather significantly. For instance, various practices that would be considered stealing by some (e.g.  skimming off the top) are not considered theft by others. 

The following justifications are usually used to justify the acquisition of additional resources not produced by one's own labor:

   (1) Demonization -- The person with the objects (e.g. "the man") is evil, this justifies the action

   (2) Surplus -- There is so much there for the taking, won't hurt anyone (typically used when taking things from governments)

   (3) In-group -- My right as as member of x group (e.g. an ethicity) are much more important than the larger collective (see, for example, tribal politics in Africa)

   (4) Egoism -- I'm great, rules don't apply to me

   (5) Inaccessible -- The product can't be purchased

   (6) Can't afford -- The product is too expensive

   (7) Borrowing only 

Usually a combination of these justifications is at play and is actually believed by the participant. For example, it is much easier to maintain (3) than (4), since one can simply say that one's collective (perhaps a company, perhaps an ethnicity) is deserving of more than others for virtue of some merit. When combined with governments, this is very easily combined with (2), that because there is so much "pork" already at play, that one is "entitled" to some part of it.

While some of these would very easily be called "corruption," a particularly virulent form concerns the easy with which we demonize others -- usually in order to give ourselves extra privileges vis-a-vis this other. For instance, industrial polluters are ignored, while the RIAA, which attempts to protect the interests of commercial music producers is vilified. This, I suspect, is simply because the demonization of one justifies various other actions, whereas the reality of the "evil" of the other does not provide any benefit to the individual. Note that there is no obvious rational connection between the badness of the other and what one is entitled to take from them (e.g. there are plenty of people I think provide a net negative impact on mankind, but would never assume that I am entitled to their belongings as result). This is also why very strong emotionally loaded terms like "evil" must be used, since they are assumed to transcend rationality. 

There is a positive variant of this argument that appears specifically related to software and intellectual property, found, for instance, in the statement "all software should be free." While this statement ignores the rather large costs that go into certain types of software (imagine producing autocad design or air traffic control software for free), it nonetheless presents a positive ideal related to intellectual inquiry, which should be indeed be as "open" as possible. Unfortunately, statements of this sort I have read are virtually always left at a very primitive intellectual stage and not developed from this point, largely because they refuse to deal with the larger problems of governance and economics. The production of intellectual products and ensuring maximal accessibility are both legal and infrastructural problems, also with certain costs associated with them that are ideally born by governments (e.g. maintaining roads and schools where access to the "information superhighway" is available for free. To restate, providing for something for free (as is the ideal in this case), means that someone else must ultimately bear the cost for the service (e.g. the government).  In any case, private corporations which develop products at their own costs are certainly not required to provide products for free and I do not see this as adequate justification for "theft."

Consequently, the only justifications I consider to be potentially valid are (5), (6), and (7). The internet today provides a method for acquiring media that creates a number of unforeseen (and potentially unforeseeable) possibilities, and morality must adjust accordingly. First, I see "previewing" media as a possibility but slippery slope. Borrowing media was previously made difficult by space, today it is instantaneous and rarely requires a return. The fact that the return is optional means that "borrowing" will only be "borrowing" when it is rigorously practiced, meaning that one must note when various items are "borrowed" and remove on such and such a pre-planned date. While I do not find this problematic in the abstract, because the implementation is quite difficult it is not recommended unless there is already a plan for managing "borrowed" objects in advance (including a return timetable).

The fact regarding "affordability" is, I find, is sometimes, but rarely true. It is most obviously true when one wishes a single use of an object (e.g. an obscure film) and yet the objects is not available for loan. Then it can be "acquired" (and potentially deleted) without any payment for the object. This is, in a certain sense, a gap of expectations and available technologies. We expect to be able to see things more or less instantaneously without planning (even with fairly obscure objects), and yet technology is not always available which allows us to do this. When it comes to purchase, I am torn, as there are certain types of objects which, when produced for export are sold at a 3x markup (for example, OSTs for anime series).  The general lesson here is that, if one is too poor to buy what one wishes to have, one should make money so that one can purchase in the future. I do not see any large problem with obtaining some copies in the intermediary period so long as the intention persists (and is eventually actualized). The difficult problem along the way is watching other expenditures (if you are, for example, spending money on expensive dinners but not on purchasing licensed copies of the software on your computer).

Inaccessible objects are really the only clear case where obtaining objects one has not worked for does not appear to me to be in any way "theft." However, this is increasingly only the case for obscure objects. Recently, when watching a Fritz Lang film I noticed that there were not even any active BitTorrents for it and I was forced to rely on a friend's taped copy from when the film was shown on Austrian Television. The object (like some anime series I was watching at the time) did not appear to be available in the city where I was at all, neither for purchase nor rent. I have no problem with obtaining objects like this and, indeed, I see it as one of the key uses of the internet (the creation and amplification of the "long tail").