The existence of a "right" and "left" is, although an over-simplification, at times a useful one. If right signifies, in some sense, conservative, it is easy to see how each large and sweeping movement which leaves a lasting impact is a legacy of the Left, a product of the "mass conscription" which I believe to be the most fundamental disruption of modern times. Indeed, I believe that democracy itself follows on the back of this simple technological principle -- invest the people with some greater degree of power (either that, or simply promises) and you will have a larger army.  Although he attempted something similar, I doubt historians will view Hitler as a potential Napoleon in his own right, since it seems that, although he was adept at appropriating democracy and mass media to his own needs, he did not offer anything truly new -- and, in fact, galvanized the public around primarily defensive measures (e.g. "the race").

This is to say that the Right, particularly when it comes to academics, represents a greater heterogeneity than the Left, in the sense that it is a deposit of antique ideas and modes of life. Of course, many aspects of each mode may be seen in a positive light (for instance, I personally prefer Victorian fashion to contemporary American taste), but the preference for something that does not exist in the present world has a tendency to produce bitterness, which, if carried over into the political realm, is always regressive and occasionally nasty. This is not to decry conservative bulwarks like Metternich or the desire to patch together a working entity out the remnants of the positive values of previous ages. This always exists and should be encouraged, although it is never revolutionary.

The benefit of the left is that, although in a sense I believe it will always be "dumber" than the right broadly defined, insofar as the intellectual spectrum is limited to a narrow band, this narrow band is something that can be actualized. As everyone involved in community building knows (whether non-profits, churches, or other community groups) a rather large degree of homogeneity is preferable and, indeed, necessary for the community to cohere. This is also to some extent the need of humans to exist in a narrative context, in which there is a sense of both goal and accomplishment. This means that the "Left," once it emerges, will always have the greater cohesion necessary to triumph over the right, except at such a time when it exhausts itself. This exhaustion will likely be the product of an exhausted intellectual modus that is the product of the lack of realization of the creators -- indeed, the entire history of the United States over the past few decades is the story of the triumph of a particular modus of the Left (e.g. Wilsonian nation-building) which gradually grafted in various elements until a fascinating great degree of resources were expended. 

Although I have no problem with conservative statesmen and conservative parties in general -- certainly there is generally a need to have a political balance, protecting against the over-reach of a particular faction, I believe that the true benefit of the right is in repository of intellect which can be found in ancient tomes -- something very frequently missed by academics simply seeking to apply the latest trend to old texts for the sake of advancing their careers. In this sense, there is an incredible amount to be gained from thinkers who were "of the right," only in the sense that they remained in a rarified space somewhat removed from their age.

In the Anglophone tradition, I think primarily of figures as Burke, Carlyle, Tolkien, and  Orestes Brownson, who, in standing in a certain sense apart from an age, nonetheless provided a bulwark for those seeking to build a better one. 






 





